---
layout: post
title: "The Ground on Which Stands God"
description: "Analysis of how we take god to be and how far we are successful in justifiably holding those beliefs"
modified: 2014-07-12 21:25:40 -0400
category: []
tags: [god, religion, belief]
image:
  feature: texture-feature-05.jpg
  credit: 
  creditlink: 
comments: 
share: 
---

Let us consider the following case- A bus, carrying 20 passengers’ falls off a cliff; out of the 20 passengers only 11 survive. In the aftermath, the belief that a believer holds is that god is kind for he saved 11 lives. 
Where did we come to believe in the notion called ‘God’? Was this the default perspective or one that was created in light of spiritual requirements? We possess rationality and have changed the face of the world. Humans like to believe that this rationality must have been the gift of a being more powerful and rational than us; moreover we like to believe that there is a reason why we were endowed with this superior reasoning. We come across various believers who claim to have interacted with the divine. But how far can we say that this view is justifiable? If we take the above example, what is it that makes a theist believe that god is kind for he saved 11 lives? Is it possible for the theist to give an account of why the other 9 passengers die? 

The question of making sense of the notion ‘God’ is a very difficult one for it is difficult to verify this on empirical grounds. There isn’t a physical entity with which we are directly acquainted so as to make claims about it. Anyway we try to make sense of it, seems like a shot in the dark. The view of the eastern tradition is the view that god cannot be defined. To define the nature of God by humans would be a contradiction. God doesn’t exist in the sense that we exist, so to give an account via the limited knowledge we possess would not do justice to this concept. But the problem is that unless we can form some concept of the [divine](#divine), it is difficult to engage in any commitment towards god. It would be meaningless to be in awe of something whose concept could not be conceived.

The form/conception of god that one forms only surfaces what virtues or traits one values. Now, the aim of my paper is not to debate whether god exists or not. I, for one believe that such a debate cannot be solved due to the lack of evidence that we have. I don’t seem to have a problem with the ‘indefinable God’ but the problem is with the view that treats god as a limitless human. What I aim to achieve here is to question the tenability of the belief or understanding of such a form of God. I will be analyzing how we take god to be and how far we are successful in justifiably holding those beliefs. For most parts, I will be discussing the Christian concept of ‘God’ and then question the very grounds on which the concept stands. What I aim to show here is that the Judeo-Christian concept cannot be justified on any ground. The point to be noted is that although it is impossible to understand god without any conception, the real problem lies, if we are equipped enough to come up with a tenable conception of god or are we holding wrong beliefs about god.

To begin with let us take into account the theistic [God](#God) as understood by Richard Swinburne in his paper called, [‘God’](#Swinburne). The concept of god that he wants to put forth is that of a personal god. The implication here is that god can be understood as having traits and powers similar to ours, the only difference being that of intensity. If we consider ourselves to have limited attributes, then these can be attributed to god in an absolute sense. It is very difficult to agree on a specific definition of god, so to make the matter clear I will be taking the explanation given by Swinburne as the definition of a theistic Christian god. We humans can be understood as having various powers. We can walk, we can pick a pen from one table and put it on another or one could go to the library to read books. These can be considered as basic human powers. Similarly god can be understood as having similar basic powers, the only difference being that of intensity. The powers of god can be understood as being of an eternal essence, not bound by any laws of nature. What Swinburne is focusing on is the anthropomorphic idea of god, where we are attributing human properties to god. Accordingly, god can be understood as having attributes of an infinite essence. God is omniscient, omnipotent, omnipresent, perfectly free, perfectly good, creator of the world, source of our morality and the sustainer of the universe. But there is a qualification that has to be kept in mind while attributing these properties to god. When we call god an omnipotent being, we don’t mean that he has the power to do that which is absurd. As a result, if god cannot make a square circle or make 2+2=5, then this is not because god is limited in anyway but because doing this is logically impossible. God cannot be expected to do the logically incoherent. Secondly, as limited beings we may have some true beliefs and also some false beliefs. But god is omniscient (he knows everything) and all his beliefs are necessarily true. Here, again, he doesn’t mean that god will know what ‘X’ will want to eat tomorrow. His omniscience too must include that which is logically knowable. This is not to say that the omniscience of god is limited but it is the will of god that he permits free will in humans.
From the point of view of creation, god could have opted to not create the world. But he chooses to create the world as it is today. As a result, god is the creator of the world. The last attribute that I would like to discuss from the point of view of my paper is the moral perfection of god. The theistic conception of god entails that god is perfectly good as he is free to do what he thinks is right and is omniscient. Humans due to their limited rationality are unable to overpower various inclinations that cloud our actions/judgments. But this limitation doesn’t bind god in anyway. Since, all that god believes is true, he has absolute knowledge of that which is perfectly good. One point that Swinburne makes, which makes this view problematic is the statement that god must have these properties ‘necessarily’ – which would imply that if god exists then he can’t exist without these properties. 
The problem with the above conception of god lies in the view that these attributes must belong to god necessarily. By necessity here I mean two things, 1) that it is true and 2) that it could not have been [otherwise](#Kripke). The question then up for debate is, if such a conception of god, where god must necessarily exist with the above fixed attributes a justifiable belief or are we wrong in holding these beliefs?

Let us take two grounds to analyze the above mentioned concept of god,


## On empirical grounds?

What evidence do we have to hold on to the belief in god? We don’t know for sure whether god exists or not, at least on the account of the empirical evidence that is available to us. There is a paper called [‘The Ethics of Belief’](#Clifford) written by W.K. Clifford where he brings out the wrongness of any belief held on inadequate evidence. Let us discuss an example given by Clifford himself- Suppose a ship owner was about to send an emigrant ship to sea. Now he is a little doubtful about the fitness of the ship, as it has needed many repairs in the past and is considerably old. Instead of following on these doubts, this ship owner tries to reassure himself, that the ship would sail safely, as it has always done so in the past cases and returned home safely. In his mind, the ship owner is convinced that nothing could go wrong with his ship. But what happens on the contrary is that the ship drowns. The ship owner in Clifford’s eyes is guilty of the drowning of the ship and the death of various men on board, for his belief in the safe returning of the ship was not based on investigation but he simply back-staged his doubts and reassured himself on inadequate grounds. If we take the other case, where the ship returns back home safely, still the ship owner would be at fault for his belief still stood on inadequate grounds. The point that Clifford is making is that the main problem lies not with the wrong belief but with the action which gets motivated by those wrong beliefs. No matter how convinced one maybe of his/her beliefs, this conviction cannot escape the procedure of being thoroughly investigated. In short, he is criticizing holding a belief on inadequate grounds. Holding such a belief is wrong irrespective of its truth or falsity, for it was held on insufficient evidence. The evidence that was present to you doesn’t allow you to hold such beliefs. Applying this to the above concept of god, one could question the tenability of such a conception. I am not here endorsing that there is in fact no god, but simply stating that irrespective of the truth or falsity of our belief in the theistic concept of god, the basic flaw in such an argument is that it stands on inadequate grounds.


## Is it possible to justify our belief in god on logical grounds?

Now a major portion of the knowledge that we possess is not a result of the direct empirical evidence available to us. If we only go by the certainty of that which is available to us in direct sense experience then no objective knowledge should be possible and we should be unable to make objective claims of any kind. A theist could use such a line of reasoning to strengthen his position. This would mean that refuting the belief in god on empirical grounds is not sufficient for this still leaves open the possibility of believing in god because it could be a logically tenable idea. The question then up for debate is if we can logically verify or justify the belief in god.
Let us take the case of a man who believes that god exists. Now it is reasonable to inquire why the man claims this way. We may ask for evidence or reason this man has for the belief he holds.
There are a variety of formal proofs that a theist offers to defend his belief in the existence of god. To examine the logical tenability of the idea of god, it is essential to analyze the ontological argument which was offered by St. Anselm. [Norman Malcolm](#Malcolm) articulates the argument offered by Anselm as follows; now it is possible for us to conceive the idea of a being, greater than which nothing can be conceived. We can understand something as existing both in the understanding as well as in reality. A being which exists both in the understanding as well in reality is greater than a being that only exists in the understanding. Hence, the being greater than which none other can be conceived must exist both in reality as well as in the understanding. God is such a being, as a result god must exist both in reality as well as in the understanding. Since god is a being than which none greater is conceivable, god must necessarily exist. The standard definition that we have taken of god states that god is to be considered as a being with unlimited powers and of an eternal essence. Since we can conceive the idea of an omnipotent, omniscient, morally perfect and unlimited god, such a god must necessarily exist. For it is a contradiction to say that god is a being than which none greater is conceivable and that he might not exist. So the belief in god is a belief which is logically justifiable since such a god exists for the theist. 

I had mentioned before the problems with attributing properties to god in a way which entails that they must belong to him necessarily. The implication of the above proof is that god must exist necessarily i.e. existence is a property which must necessarily apply to god such that to say that god is the greatest being on earth and yet he might not exist leads to a logical contradiction. This claim has been questioned by [J.J.C. Smart](#Smart), where he says that it is consistent to deny the existence of god as doing so doesn’t lead to any contradiction. The premise is an existential proposition. And an existential proposition can in no way be logically necessary. It is possible for the debate to go both ways. If god does exist then it is a contingent fact for it could have very well been the case that god did not exist. To hold a belief such as the one which claims that the existence of god is a necessary truth is not a logically necessary one.

Another major logical embarrassment that a theist has to face is the problem of [evil](#Griffiths). Now what rationale is to be made out in this case? If we go by the way the theistic god is understood, then god has no limit. He is the absolute being with unlimited power, knowledge and absolute moral perfection. Now even if we take the account of the theist to be tenable for even a moment, new problems get surfaced. How can we logically believe in a god who permits evil in this world? Humans as we know are fallible and we are prone to committing evil. But the reason behind this is that we are limited beings. This limit that is subjected to our faculties is why at times we are unable to control the happenings around us. But the way we understand god, he is perfect and limitless. So excuses can work in the case of limited beings but not in the case of a perfect being like god. 
The most obvious inconsistency in the belief in god can be brought out by the following argument;

1. God is perfect, benevolent, omnipotent, omniscient and the creator of the world.
2. God has the power to create a world without evil.
3. God has the knowledge that evil is a bad thing.
4. God opposes evil owing to his absolute benevolence.
5. Evil shouldn’t exist in the world created by god.
6. God in fact does exist.       

> *Therefore, evil doesn’t exist.*

But evil in fact does exist. According to the standard definition god is absolutely kind. But if god has the absolute sense of morality and the capability to prevent evil, why is there evil in the world? Why couldn’t god create a world with no evil if he had the power to do so? The theist may try to justify this by clarifying that evil is the result of free will that god had endowed upon us. God could have created a world with pre-determined beings performing only good actions. But the value of free will is so much that god permit evil to exist so as to let us enjoy the freedom to choose. 
What the theist mistakenly seems to be doing is explaining evil as moral evil. He is clubbing both moral evil and physical evil under one category. This lands the theist in trouble. Free will can only account for moral evil but it becomes powerless if we consider physical evil. [McCloskey](#McCloskey) in his paper called ‘God and Evil’ explains how physical evil is a different category in itself and cannot be reduced to moral evil. The maximum that free will can account for is some amount of moral evil. McCloskey gives elaborate arguments against this move, but I will be discussing only a few of them that also, in a brief fashion.

1. Natural calamities don’t pick people who have sinned, but it kills any life that comes in contact with it. Many times infants and animals also die, who are for most parts incapable of committing sin. 
2. The theist might attempt to justify evil on the grounds that it enables us to incorporate moral virtues. But I don’t get how a child born with disabilities and who has to struggle everyday simply for performing basic functions, would develop moral virtues.
3. At the most the theist must accept one of the following alternatives if he is to logically hold on to his belief in god;

	* Maybe god is morally perfect but doesn’t have the power to create a world without evil in it.
	* Or god is perfect in every sense but there is another being that creates evil. In which case god is not the only powerful being in the world.
	* God lacks perfect morality, so he creates a world where evil is the basis of the existence of individual.

The very make up of the world that god created is based on evil. Now what baffles me the most is the fact that if god is perfectly good and did not create evil then who did? Are we humans so powerful as to defy the all good nature that god created us with and instead create evil in this world? Well if so then maybe we are more powerful than god! I will not be able to discuss his arguments in totality. But the basic idea that he puts forth is that the Christian theistic belief in god is not reasonable. The conception of god that the theist puts forth cannot exist for it creates various logical problems.
This topic is one which is very difficult to discuss. The belief in a personal god is one that is cherished by a majority of the world population. One cannot for sure establish that god doesn’t exist or even that he does exist. But we can question the beliefs about god that we hold. It is both logically and empirically incoherent to hold beliefs about something we really have no idea or evidence. When we hold beliefs then that doesn’t always remain a personal matter but something that affects the people around us. What if god is an entity who has no sense of morality? Or perhaps in reality god is altogether indifferent to all that he creates? Or we are an experiment gone wrong and he is just too weak to destroy us and so he creates a world of self destruction? What if? This is all that we can ask and will be able to ask. Now the theist might argue that maybe the all perfect god in fact does exist. But the problem with this view is that as limited as we are, we are able to understand that evil is a bad thing. If we can understand this then why can’t god? The main problem lies with attributing all these perfections to god necessarily. There would be no problem if we admit that god is morally imperfect or that god is not all powerful. But in spite of no proof we attribute these properties to god in an absolute sense and are committing the fallacy of anthropomorphizing god. Maybe god exists or maybe he doesn’t but the way the Christian theists explain god, such a god cannot exist.  

#### References 

1. *Philosophy Of Religion* - An Anthology ( Blackwell philosophy anthologies, 2003), edited by Charles Taliaferro and Paul J. Griffiths, p-47 <a name="divine"></a> 

2. God here is used in the sense of the Christian understanding of god and henceforth when I use the term ‘god’, that very understanding is to be taken into account. <a name="God"></a> 

3. Richard Swinburne, ‘God’, Philosophy Of Religion- an Anthology (Blackwell philosophy anthologies, 2003), edited by Charles Taliaferro and Paul J. Griffiths, pp. 51-57. <a name="Swinburne"></a> 

4. The definition given by Saul Kripke, Naming and Necessity, Oxford 1980, pg 36. <a name="Kripke"></a> 

5. W. K. Clifford, “The Ethics of Belief,” from lectures and essays (1874).  <a name="Clifford"></a>

6. Norman Malcolm, “Anselm’s Ontological Arguments,” from The Philosophical Review 69(1960), pp.41-62. <a name="Malcolm"></a>

7. New Essays in Philosophical Theology, p-34. <a name="Smart"></a>

8. *Philosophy Of Religion* - An Anthology ( Blackwell philosophy anthologies, 2003), edited by Charles Taliaferro and Paul J. Griffiths, p-359.  <a name="Griffiths"></a>

9. McCloskey, H. J. 1960. “God and Evil.” Philosophical Quarterly 10: 97-114. <a name="McCloskey"></a>

